Just come outside for the night.
NOTE CONF
Take your time.
Get your knife dirty.
NOTE CONF
Thank me.
Have you.
NOTE CONF
Been keeping p p p p p p p p
p p p We need to get a feel for.
NOTE CONF
The charisma estate where you win your prize.
Fuck that paper, baby.
NOTE CONF
My face on the dotted line.
I've been flying out of town for some peace of
NOTE CONF
mind.
It's like always.
NOTE CONF
They just want a peace of mind.
I've been focussed on the future.
NOTE CONF
Never right now.
What I'm sippin I can butchie the pick up around.
NOTE CONF
I'm the one that introduce you to.
To you right now.
NOTE CONF
Oh my God, that be baby, baby when I right.
Try to fight in the night.
NOTE CONF
Though my life ain't a sneak.
Ain't it?
NOTE CONF
Ain't it ain't 18.
P p p p p p p p p p
NOTE CONF
p p p p p p p p p p.
Sir.
NOTE CONF
Wait.
He asked.
NOTE CONF
Me my sheet.
Last year.
NOTE CONF
You try to confirm if I mean your time.
Holy shit.
NOTE CONF
I hung around Philly like I'm on a plane.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Shout out to your friends.
I'm goin crazy.
NOTE CONF
How can it be?
She's not innocent.
NOTE CONF
She's trying to go right.
So, uh, one of your classmates recommended that I play
NOTE CONF
this, uh, this music.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Um, I guess more up to date than my usual
selections, but, uh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Makes me a little dizzy to watch this graphics actually,
NOTE CONF
but never mind.
Um, yes.
NOTE CONF
So, um, today I'm going to, uh, uh, give a
lecture on, um, data representation.
NOTE CONF
And data abstraction today is data representation.
And, um, on Monday I'll carry on with this and
NOTE CONF
then talk about data abstraction.
So, um, we've now finished with the most important, uh,
NOTE CONF
elements of functional programming in Haskell.
You know, you've learned about, uh, lists and comprehensions, recursion,
NOTE CONF
uh, higher order functions, algebraic data types, um, and so
forth, pattern matching, function definitions, all these things.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm going to be talking about an idea,
um, of programming, which is not specific to Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, it's uh, the, the topic of data abstraction.
And so one of the, I would say top 3
NOTE CONF
or 4 for ideas in programming.
Um, uh, and the the the what it allows you
NOTE CONF
to do is to separate getting things right from making
things go fast.
NOTE CONF
And so you can deal with those two things separately
and, and in that way deal with them better.
NOTE CONF
But first, I want to announce the, uh, the 2024,
um, Informatics one eight programming competition.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a competition for this course with prizes,
uh, which are Amazon vouchers.
NOTE CONF
But the most important prize is the is, is that
you'll become famous and and you'll have something to put
NOTE CONF
on your CV that you won the, you know, first
or second prize or whatever for this course.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The Amazon vouchers, I have to say, are not for
NOTE CONF
a very large amount of money, but it's the thought
that counts.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, they're sponsored by this company, Galois here.
This is an American company that uses a lot of
NOTE CONF
Haskell.
Um, they do a lot of work for the US
NOTE CONF
government, and, um, uh, they use Haskell, uh, to, to
do almost all of their programming.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, um, the competition is, uh, you have to
write a Haskell program with interesting graphics.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, there are some graphics libraries in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
I'm not the right person to ask about them, but
you have to find about find out about them yourself,
NOTE CONF
and you can use them to to make a nice
picture or an animation or something like that.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, there are some entries from a previous year
online at this website.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll show you these in a second.
Uh, anyway, uh, this is of course, of course, optional,
NOTE CONF
but it's fun, and I do encourage you to give
it a try.
NOTE CONF
Um, the prizes will be awarded in the last FP
lecture of this semester.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, the submission is about a week before that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, uh, something to do if you feel motivated.
NOTE CONF
Uh, let me just show you some pictures from a
previous year.
NOTE CONF
This is actually, I think, 2019.
So these students will have all graduated by now.
NOTE CONF
Let me find this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, well, that's that's big enough.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to turn the lights down because some of
these are dark and you won't see them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I don't know how to get this is okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so some nice pictures.
Um.
NOTE CONF
You know, they have uh, sometimes, uh, often have reasons
behind them.
NOTE CONF
This is a Sierpinski triangle.
This, uh, this thing there.
NOTE CONF
Here's an animated one.
Uh, another animated one.
NOTE CONF
These are all third prizes.
There were a lot of, uh, there were a lot
NOTE CONF
of submissions that year.
Um, okay, I'll just flick through these, um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Some some Mandelbrot set, uh, things there.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is from chaos theory, I think.
NOTE CONF
Lorenz attractor.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Another animation.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are the sort of things some previous students
have have, uh, submitted.
NOTE CONF
You can click on this yourself and, and, uh, and
look at these, uh, with more time.
NOTE CONF
I think the code is provided as well for these,
um, for these if you go into that website.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the that's the programming competition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But um, we should talk about data representation and data
NOTE CONF
abstraction now.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
The judging, uh, will be on the basis of, um,
NOTE CONF
aesthetic appeal and, um, uh, how interesting the idea is
behind it.
NOTE CONF
And, um, maybe the level of ambition.
Okay, that is high ambition is better than low ambition.
NOTE CONF
Um, within the context of what you're able to do
in a couple of weeks in this course.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
No questions.
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'll carry on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I'm going to talk about efficiency.
Um, so up until now, uh, I've been telling you
NOTE CONF
not to worry about making your programs run fast.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Uh, worry about whether they're correct or not.
So, you know, get it right.
NOTE CONF
Keep it simple.
Make it clear.
NOTE CONF
Don't worry about efficiency.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is this is in response to students
who come and say, you know, is recursion slower or
NOTE CONF
faster than list comprehension and so forth.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, these these things normally don't make that much difference.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And Haskell is implemented using lots of clever, uh, optimisations
and things.
NOTE CONF
So that often exactly the way you write a program
is not going to make any difference to how fast
NOTE CONF
it runs.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so this is the reason why I've been saying
don't worry about efficiency, okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, but sometimes in programming you do need to worry
about making things run fast, and that's especially when you're
NOTE CONF
dealing with very large amounts of data, you know?
So, uh, for example, Google, um, you know, the way
NOTE CONF
that it gets searched to run, the way that it
runs is that it does, um, it indexes the entire
NOTE CONF
internet.
Um, you know, well, it used to be overnight.
NOTE CONF
Now I don't know how long it takes, but anyway,
it goes through the enormous amounts of data out there
NOTE CONF
in the internet and looks at all of it and,
and compiles an index using, uh, you know, warehouses full
NOTE CONF
of computers to do this concurrently and so forth.
Um, of course, when you're dealing with gazillion, uh, gigabytes
NOTE CONF
of data, um, you have to use good algorithms, okay?
And not and not just, uh, the first thing you
NOTE CONF
thought of.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So when you're processing lots of data, then of course
efficiency is important.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's what I want to talk about now is,
NOTE CONF
is, um, some of these concerns and this is a
topic called a complexity theory.
NOTE CONF
And there's, uh, you know, some, some material about this
in the second year.
NOTE CONF
Um, once you get there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a little taste of that.
So, um, this is Donald Knuth, who is, uh, one
NOTE CONF
of the Turing Award winners.
Um, and he said premature optimisation is the root of
NOTE CONF
all evil.
And this is true.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to prove it to you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to write down my proof.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ready?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we all know that money is the root of
all evil, right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Actually, uh, that's not the, the correct, um, quotation.
NOTE CONF
The correct one is the love of money.
Is the root of all evil.
NOTE CONF
And that's from, um, that's actually in the Bible.
First book of Timothy.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there, if you want to look it up.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can read that, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But we also know, uh, time is money.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Everybody knows that time is money.
So actually, the love of time.
NOTE CONF
You know, therefore, the love of time.
Is the root of all evil.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
What's the love of time?
NOTE CONF
Well that's optimisation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Making things fast.
Okay, so optimisation.
NOTE CONF
Optimisation is the root of all evil.
So that's not sequin calculus, but it's an informal, informal
NOTE CONF
proof that optimisation is the root of all evil.
And um, uh, Donald Knuth says premature optimisation.
NOTE CONF
So that's optimising before uh, you know, as uh, too
early.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So, um, that's my, uh, proof of this fact, and
NOTE CONF
nobody laughed.
So my joke didn't work.
NOTE CONF
But never mind.
Um, that's that's better.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anyway, um, here's another here's another authority.
NOTE CONF
This is, uh, Tony Hawk.
Sir Tony hawk, um, uh, agreeing with Donald Knuth, And
NOTE CONF
he's another Turing Award winner.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're going to look at the difference between good programs
and bad programs, not the difference between, um, uh, programs,
NOTE CONF
uh, you know, okay programs and slightly better programs going
to be talking about dramatic differences between programs.
NOTE CONF
So it's not about whether, you know, uh, repeating in
addition, somewhere in a computation, rather than storing the value
NOTE CONF
of the addition and then reusing it is, is is,
uh, you know, whether that makes things faster.
NOTE CONF
But about the difference between different algorithms, okay.
And sometimes the difference can be huge, but it depends
NOTE CONF
on the amount of data you're dealing with.
And let me show you a little example.
NOTE CONF
And this is a this is a, a contrived, uh,
simple example just to, just to make a point.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Suppose that we've got a list of lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These are.
These are, um, Em lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's, uh, x is one through, x is m, and
NOTE CONF
each of these lists is of length n okay.
And we want to, um, concatenate them all together.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Join the men to end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's two ways that we can do this.
NOTE CONF
There's more than two ways, but here are two ways.
There's.
NOTE CONF
I can do it with a fold L okay.
This little program here, you know, fold l using using
NOTE CONF
append, starting with the empty list and taking this, this
list of lists.
NOTE CONF
And I get this computation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is, this is what that that program effectively
does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, now let's look and see what it's doing here.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I want to count the number of steps
that it's taking.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now, um, it's doing a lot of appends and the
NOTE CONF
code for append.
Um, if you recall, uh, you probably don't.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, it does recursion on the left hand argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So effectively the size of the left hand argument in
this case it's the empty list.
NOTE CONF
The size of this argument is how many steps it's
going to take to do the append.
NOTE CONF
So if it's got, you know, an empty list then
it gives the answer immediately.
NOTE CONF
It's zero steps, essentially zero steps with some overhead for
recursion and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If it's a if it's a list with 100 items,
NOTE CONF
it does essentially 100 steps.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm not counting exactly.
I'm sort of talking about the ballpark amount of steps
NOTE CONF
that's taking.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's it's the number of steps that the first
argument is long.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we look at this computation, the first the
NOTE CONF
first bit Here are.
The first bit is taking zero steps.
NOTE CONF
Let's say okay.
And the result of that is a list of length
NOTE CONF
n.
Because each of these lists of length n okay.
NOTE CONF
The next the next depend okay.
The left hand argument has length n, so that takes
NOTE CONF
n steps.
The next append the first argument is of length two.
NOTE CONF
And so this takes two n steps and so forth
and so forth and so forth.
NOTE CONF
And we get this number of steps okay.
It's, it's it's um that's an expression.
NOTE CONF
And that expression uh, adds up to um, it's um
m minus one times m over two times n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to use a notation that I'm going to
NOTE CONF
define in a minute, uh, called O notation.
Um, for writing this down.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, the important thing is that it's proportional.
You can read this, that it's of order or proportional
NOTE CONF
to m squared times n.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's, that's the result of doing it that way.
If I do it, if I do it instead of
NOTE CONF
fold l here, if I place that with a fold
r, and I'm not telling you this because I want
NOTE CONF
you to use fold R instead of fold L is
just this particular computation comparing two ways of doing it.
NOTE CONF
If I do it with a fold r, I get
the same answer and the computation looks like.
NOTE CONF
Now looks like this.
Because the difference between fold l and fold r is
NOTE CONF
kind of bracketing to the left versus bracketing to the
right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And and looking looking at this computation, I'm doing you
NOTE CONF
know the left hand argument here has n uh is
of length n.
NOTE CONF
So this takes n steps.
And then this append takes n steps and this append
NOTE CONF
takes n steps and so forth.
Okay, so I end up doing um n times m
NOTE CONF
steps.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The result the number of steps is proportional to m
times n okay.
NOTE CONF
And comparing these to these two things there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is, this is m times.
This takes m times longer than this okay.
NOTE CONF
If there are if m is a thousand, then it's
a thousand times.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it takes a thousand times as long.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is the kind of thing I'm talking about
with, uh, with efficiency.
NOTE CONF
Is that, um, a choice of sometimes the order in
which you do things or, um, you know, when it's
NOTE CONF
when it's in a recursive program or something, it can
make a big difference.
NOTE CONF
And, and, um, another point here is that the efficiency
or the time that something takes is, of course, dependent
NOTE CONF
on the amount of data that you've got.
It makes no sense to talk about how fast a
NOTE CONF
program is without saying what what size the data is.
Okay, so we were talking about the the time a
NOTE CONF
computation takes as a function of how much data we're
using as the input.
NOTE CONF
And so what we're interested in is, is how the
time grows as a function of the amount of data
NOTE CONF
that we're giving it to to compute with.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let me show you some pictures.
And this is comparing growth rates of functions okay.
NOTE CONF
So the two functions I had here were m squared
times n and m times n.
NOTE CONF
I'll start with slightly simpler examples.
So here here are two curves.
NOTE CONF
There's a linear one.
So this is this is this is uh okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh t t is the is the is the y
axis and and n is the the x axis.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So here is t equals n.
NOTE CONF
It's a it's a straight line with uh with slope
one.
NOTE CONF
And here is t equals n squared.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ignore the um well actually the scale here is correct.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The intersection is at one.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Intersection is at x equals one or.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um n equals one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But you see um, the of course the, the linear
uh, the linear one is a straight line like this.
NOTE CONF
And the and the, the quadratic one, the parabola is,
is, uh, growing much faster once you get past this
NOTE CONF
intersection.
It grows much faster.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you look at something like, um, n equals
NOTE CONF
a thousand, then then you know you'll be way, way,
way up into the ceiling here.
NOTE CONF
And this one will still be over there somewhere.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
That there that that direction.
Um, I'm looking at everything.
NOTE CONF
Uh, mirror image of what you're looking at.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the point here is that is that, um,
if n is is is large, then this function is
NOTE CONF
enormously, uh, gives enormously larger values than this function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It exceeds that function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is, this is this is why I would
say that a linear function is faster than a quadratic
NOTE CONF
function.
This is the these two specific functions, this specific linear
NOTE CONF
function and this specific quadratic function.
What if I talk.
NOTE CONF
What if I look at a fast a fast quadratic
function and a slow linear function.
NOTE CONF
Let's say it's it's half the speed the um or
sorry, it takes half the time.
NOTE CONF
The fast quadratic function and the linear function takes double
the time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that means we've got instead of t equals n
NOTE CONF
we've got t equals two n.
And instead of t equals n squared we've got t
NOTE CONF
equals you know n squared over two or or t
equals one half n squared.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then the picture looks like this.
NOTE CONF
So the the the linear function has.
Now uh you know it's gone from a, a slope
NOTE CONF
like that to a slope like that.
And uh, the uh the quadratic function is a little
NOTE CONF
bit flatter.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But still once you get to um t n equals
four, which is this intersection, it's still the case that
NOTE CONF
the quadratic function is going to always exceed.
The value is always going to exceed the value of
NOTE CONF
the linear function okay.
So it's better for n greater than for And who
NOTE CONF
cares about who cares about the the value for and
less than for?
NOTE CONF
I mean, we're talking about about size of problems here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you're computing something and, um, and you've got an
algorithm which is faster but only for inputs of length
NOTE CONF
less than four, who cares?
Right.
NOTE CONF
You're interested in inputs of length 1000 or 1 million,
right?
NOTE CONF
I don't care about length, for it's fast.
Both of them are fast.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay, so this is about, um, uh, a slow
NOTE CONF
linear function versus a faster quadratic function.
What if instead of twice as fast, I'm talking about
NOTE CONF
100 times as fast, okay.
Or a thousand times as fast?
NOTE CONF
Okay, we've got the same picture.
It's just that the intersection point moves in that direction.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, uh, to the to the right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and so, uh, the, the, the quadratic function will
NOTE CONF
be faster for, you know, inputs of length, you know,
up to a thousand or something like that.
NOTE CONF
But then beyond that, uh, the linear one will still
win.
NOTE CONF
So what I'm trying to argue here is that the
shape of the function that matters and not, for example,
NOTE CONF
whether it's one n or two n or three n
or 17 n or whatever.
NOTE CONF
It's not it's not the it's not the constant factor
here and here.
NOTE CONF
It's the fact that it's n versus n squared, okay.
It's the shape of these, of these, uh, of these
NOTE CONF
um, curves here that matter.
And we've got a notation that I mentioned already, uh,
NOTE CONF
called uh, big O notation.
And this is a definition of it.
NOTE CONF
So this is not a, this is like the first
time I'm showing you not a Haskell program, but a
NOTE CONF
mathematical definition.
And this is a way of um.
NOTE CONF
This is a notation for describing growth rates of functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And I'm not going to go into this in a
lot of detail, but the idea is that, um, uh,
NOTE CONF
a function, uh, we say f is Big-O of G
when g is an upper bound for f for big
NOTE CONF
enough inputs.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That means that g is larger than f, provided you
look at at big inputs and not at small inputs.
NOTE CONF
And there's a precise definition of that here, which, um,
you know, for big enough inputs is um, is captured
NOTE CONF
by this bit here.
Um, you know, you're only looking at, at inputs which
NOTE CONF
are greater than some, some some value.
Um, and uh, and you ignore constant multiplicative factors, which
NOTE CONF
is what this is doing here.
Um, and, and, and I want to give you an
NOTE CONF
intuition for this rather than have you look at the
definition okay.
NOTE CONF
The intuition is that, um, all linear functions are of
order n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And uh, here's the reason, uh, which is related to
NOTE CONF
this definition here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But um, for now, the thing to remember is linear
functions are of order n no matter what the constant
NOTE CONF
factors are.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's a two there and there's a ten here.
Doesn't matter the same.
NOTE CONF
The also 15 n plus 32 would be of order
n okay.
NOTE CONF
Main thing is it's linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, uh, constant factors don't matter.
So any, any, uh, quadratic function is of order n
NOTE CONF
squared, no matter what the, um, the coefficients are.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, any cubic function is of order n cubed.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's this notation is a way of talking about
the shape of the function without looking at the details
NOTE CONF
about, you know, exactly.
You know, is it, is it three n cubed plus
NOTE CONF
two n squared plus whatever or, or you know it's
just the point that it's n cubed is important here.
NOTE CONF
And this also applies to things like logarithmic um logarithmic
functions.
NOTE CONF
And here for example, it doesn't matter what the base
of the logarithm is.
NOTE CONF
It uh It's, uh, it doesn't matter for this, um,
for this notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is this is a way of describing,
um, shapes of functions without without looking to carefully at
NOTE CONF
the details of the functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just whether they're quadratic, cubic, linear or whatever.
This is great for lazy people, okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it means you don't need you know, these are
these are going to be used to describe the runtime
NOTE CONF
of programs.
It means you don't have to look too carefully at
NOTE CONF
the details of the program and exactly how long it
takes to do each step, and exactly how many steps
NOTE CONF
are being done.
Um, in, you know, in the process of, of doing
NOTE CONF
an append or whatever, what matters is the, um, the,
um, the form of the recursion, for example.
NOTE CONF
Okay, you can usually read off, uh, these these, um,
you know, whether the whether the algorithm is linear or
NOTE CONF
quadratic or whatever, you can usually read it off by
just eyeballing the program and saying, well, uh, it's linear
NOTE CONF
because, for example, it doesn't do any recursion or in
fact, uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
In fact, it's probably constant time.
If it doesn't do any recursion, it's linear because it
NOTE CONF
does.
It does this kind of recursion.
NOTE CONF
It's quadratic because it has um, uh, nested recursion or
something like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, so this is the sort of thing that
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be interested in is whether programs are
linear, quadratic, cubic, whatever.
NOTE CONF
Here's some more pictures.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's uh, here's linear quadratic cubic and n and uh,
to the fourth power.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Um, linear.
NOTE CONF
If you manage to write a program that has linear
runtime, That's great.
NOTE CONF
Um, if it's got quadratic runtime that some, that's usually
okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh uh, cubic or into the fourth is usually too
slow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it depends on what you're doing, whether quadratic is
NOTE CONF
okay.
If you need if you're if you're dealing with really
NOTE CONF
big data sets like, like Google's um, indexing algorithm, actually
linear is too slow.
NOTE CONF
Um, you need something that's sublinear and it's very hard
to get that.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's some more curves.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's here's, uh, logarithmic along the bottom.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so logarithmic.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's really slow growing.
It means you you double the size of the problem,
NOTE CONF
and you only increase the runtime by one.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yes.
You only increase the time by one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you double, you double the size of the
program.
NOTE CONF
You increase this time by one.
So this is very, very slow growing.
NOTE CONF
Whereas, um, this this is um exponential two to the
n.
NOTE CONF
This means increasing the size of the program of the
problem by one doubles the time it takes to do
NOTE CONF
the computation.
So this is incredibly fast growing okay.
NOTE CONF
And in between we've got things like um.
Well linear.
NOTE CONF
And this is n log n n log n turns
out to be the time of sorting algorithms.
NOTE CONF
Good sorting algorithms.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there are these different.
There's the different, um, kind of uh, growth rates that
NOTE CONF
we're going to be coming across.
And so I'm going to be talking about some algorithms
NOTE CONF
and I'm going to be talking about their growth, their
their time complexity, their growth rate in these terms.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, you can also talk about space
instead of time.
NOTE CONF
So the space that that a computation takes up.
But I'm not going to be going into that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Are there any questions so far.
NOTE CONF
This is just sort of general, uh, getting us into
the right place where I can talk about efficiency in
NOTE CONF
terms that make sense for the examples I'm going to
be showing you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Does that making some sort of some sort of sense.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I see some thumbs up in the audience.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So let me, uh, let me carry on then to
NOTE CONF
the next thing that I want to talk about, I'm
going to show you, um, uh, a simple example of,
NOTE CONF
uh, of implementing sets of integers.
Uh, and I'm going to be showing you how to
NOTE CONF
do this in four different ways.
Um, so I'm going to be talking about sets with
NOTE CONF
a few operations, always the same operations for each of
the ways that I'm going to represent sets and the
NOTE CONF
operations are, uh, checking membership checking equality.
Um, those are the main ones, actually, uh, you know,
NOTE CONF
building building sets, uh, from elements and then checking equality
and, and, uh, and membership.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'll do this in four different ways.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to compare the efficiency of these
four representations in the terms that I've just described.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to start with the simplest.
NOTE CONF
And now we're into Haskell programs for doing this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um I'll start with the simplest representation that there is,
which is to represent a set as a list.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, the code, the code for this
is all you know.
NOTE CONF
You can download it.
It's it's it's together with the lecture, uh, slides on
NOTE CONF
the course's, um, learn page.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll just mention a little bit what's at
the beginning here.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, I haven't talked about this yet.
So you can structure Haskell programs into modules.
NOTE CONF
So modules are like, um, components of programs, and you
can build when you start building big programs, you, you
NOTE CONF
build them out of self-contained modules, which you then combine.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, um, you know, for example, all of
the library, all the stuff in the library is structured
NOTE CONF
into modules.
You've got, for example, the data dot list module, which
NOTE CONF
contains a whole lot of functions to do things with
lists.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, this is the, uh, the quick check module.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to be defining, uh, for each of
my, um, choices of representation.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be defining it as a module.
And the way you define a module is you give
NOTE CONF
it a name.
So this is the module list.
NOTE CONF
And and you say what it is that the module
um, exports.
NOTE CONF
That is what it makes available to uh, to other
modules that import it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And in each of my modules I'm going to be
NOTE CONF
exporting the same things, okay.
The same six things the, the the representation of sets.
NOTE CONF
So that's a type called set with a capital S.
And then these six things there's a value empty which
NOTE CONF
is a set a function insert which takes a value
and a set and gives you a set a function
NOTE CONF
set which takes a list and turns it into a
set, um, a function element which takes an element and
NOTE CONF
a set and checks whether that element is in that
set or not, and equal, which takes two sets and
NOTE CONF
tells you whether or not they're equal.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to be running through four four modules.
And each one is going to have a different representation
NOTE CONF
of data.
And so the first one uh we represent sets.
NOTE CONF
And by the way these are going to get these
going to be of increasing complex.
NOTE CONF
Well increasing uh they're going to be more complicated as
I go on, but they're going to be more efficient
NOTE CONF
as I go on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it's often the case that making things efficient
requires making them, uh, uh, making them more complicated, which
NOTE CONF
is one reason why, uh, premature optimisation is a bad
idea.
NOTE CONF
Because if you, if you make things complicated, um, they're
less likely to be correct.
NOTE CONF
So you should rather get them to be correct and
then and then worry about whether they're fast or not.
NOTE CONF
But, um, anyway, so here's sets implemented as lists.
So that is to say a set of elements of
NOTE CONF
type A, I'm going to represent just as a simple
list of, of of values of type A, okay.
NOTE CONF
Just, you know, list the elements of the sent.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then and then these functions are easy.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The empty set is the empty list.
Inserting a value into a set is just a matter
NOTE CONF
of using cons.
So we just put it on the front of the
NOTE CONF
list.
So we have a an element and a set represented
NOTE CONF
as a list.
And we, we just uh, put the new element onto
NOTE CONF
the front of that list using cons.
Um, this value, this, this function set, the ID is
NOTE CONF
it takes a list and turns it into a set.
And in this case, if the set is a list.
NOTE CONF
If that's the representation, I don't have to do anything.
So this this function doesn't do anything at all.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then the two more interesting functions here are are
NOTE CONF
membership and equality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well membership.
It's not it's not that interesting because we've got a
NOTE CONF
built in function which checks to see whether a value
is a, is a is a member of a of
NOTE CONF
a list.
And it's called elem.
NOTE CONF
And so we're just going to implement element.
That's my function which takes some a value and a
NOTE CONF
set representatives a list and gives me a boolean whether
that element is in the list or not in the
NOTE CONF
set or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, you know, x element x X is.
I'm using infix here with back quotes.
NOTE CONF
That's the same as x lm x.
This is a function that's defined in Haskell for working
NOTE CONF
on um on lists.
Okay, let's stop for a second and think about, uh,
NOTE CONF
the time it takes to do these, these things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and specifically here.
What's happening here?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, you can look up the code for, for lm
NOTE CONF
in, uh, in the Haskell library and what it does,
I mean, you've got a list here.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's my list.
And you're looking to see if an elements in the
NOTE CONF
list or not of values in the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What does it do?
It does the obvious thing.
NOTE CONF
It starts at the beginning.
Compares the value to see if it's if it's at
NOTE CONF
the front.
If it's not at the front, then it looks at
NOTE CONF
the next value.
And if it's not there, then it looks at the
NOTE CONF
next value and so forth.
Going down the list until it gets to the end.
NOTE CONF
And if it's not any of those elements, then the
answer is false.
NOTE CONF
It's not there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise it stops when it finds the element.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's going through the list from the beginning, checking
each element in turn until it finds the one that's
NOTE CONF
looking for it runs out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what what is the you know, that's, uh, o
of what?
NOTE CONF
Uh, big o of what?
Yeah, o of that big o of n yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it's it's, you know, if the list is of
length n, it will have to look on average.
NOTE CONF
It will have to look at half of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And over two.
But I've said constant factors don't matter.
NOTE CONF
So the fact that it's n over two rather than
n over three or n doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
It's o of n okay.
Linear.
NOTE CONF
This one's linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at uh at this other function.
equal.
NOTE CONF
This is testing equality of um.
Of sets.
NOTE CONF
Sets.
Representatives.
NOTE CONF
Lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now how do we check if two sets are equal
sets represented as lists?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now we have to worry about this representation.
NOTE CONF
So we can't just compare the lists used to represent
the sets using equality.
NOTE CONF
And why is that?
Okay, so.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's look at a computation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, going back a slide, I said insert is cons
and empty is the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is going to give me this list.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You know why.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's it's, you know, cons two onto the empty list
NOTE CONF
and then cons one onto that.
That gives me this list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What happens if I do it the other way around?
NOTE CONF
Well I get two comma one.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Or if I or if I, um, a little bit
NOTE CONF
more complicated, suppose I insert one into insert two and
two insert one of empty.
NOTE CONF
Then I get 1 to 1.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, these.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What you get with these, with these computations.
These sets should all be regarded as equal, okay.
NOTE CONF
Because they've all got the same elements in them.
They're just in a different order here.
NOTE CONF
And in this case you've inserted one twice.
But for sets it doesn't matter how many times something
NOTE CONF
is in a set, it's it's the same the same
set okay.
NOTE CONF
So these should all be regarded as, as equal in
the sense of uh, of the function that I'm defining
NOTE CONF
here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in order to, um, you know, if you've got
the sets represented like this, you have to do a
NOTE CONF
little bit of work to work out whether or not
two sets are equal.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the way that I've done this here is I've,
NOTE CONF
I've, I've used a helper function called subset.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um x is is a subset of Ys.
If um if everything is in X appears in Y.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's a comprehension there.
NOTE CONF
You look at all the x every x in X's
and you check to see whether x is in y's.
NOTE CONF
And if that's the case for all of those values
in xs you do a conjunction.
NOTE CONF
Then x is a subset of y's.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And equality equality xs is equal to ys.
If x is a subset of y's.
NOTE CONF
And also y's is a subset of XS.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, here we go.
NOTE CONF
So how fast is equality?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, well.
Uh, we are we're doing we're doing element hood, which
NOTE CONF
we've seen is linear.
We're doing that repeatedly here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you know this this this x is equal Y's
NOTE CONF
is defined in terms of subsets.
So let's first look at subset okay.
NOTE CONF
And what we're doing here is we're repeatedly doing this
linear computation.
NOTE CONF
And we're doing it the number of times uh that
x is has elements okay.
NOTE CONF
So what does that give me.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
N squared.
Yeah n squared quadratic okay.
NOTE CONF
So so if these are both if these are both
um of length n then this takes n squared time
NOTE CONF
okay o of n squared okay.
And doing that twice what we're doing here is doing
NOTE CONF
that twice first time and the second time, okay, possibly
getting different results because we're doing it one way around,
NOTE CONF
then the other way around.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is twice a quadratic.
So it's the same as quadratic.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
What do you have.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And of course adds uh adds some.
NOTE CONF
You mean this and yeah okay.
So that's linear right.
NOTE CONF
Because it's taking a list of uh, of values and
uh, checking to see if one of them has is
NOTE CONF
false or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's, so it's this part is quadratic and this
part is linear.
NOTE CONF
And a quadratic plus linear is quadratic okay.
And and two quadratics is a quadratic okay.
NOTE CONF
So O of n squared.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's my first implementation of of sets.
Sets lists.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll just have time to introduce the next one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this.
This explanation here motivates a different way of representing of
NOTE CONF
representing sets.
My idea is going to be to represent them as
NOTE CONF
ordered lists without repetitions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in order to list by an ordered list, I
mean like like like this one's ordered.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, increasing order of values one followed by two.
NOTE CONF
This is not.
This is in the wrong order.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
If I'm talking about increasing order.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is in the wrong order.
Okay, so I wouldn't use that.
NOTE CONF
I would use this.
And this has repetitions okay.
NOTE CONF
There's two two occurrences of one here.
So if I could somehow work out, uh, work the
NOTE CONF
representation out that all of these deliver an ordered list
instead of a unordered list.
NOTE CONF
And if the list doesn't have repetitions.
So I don't want I don't want this, I want,
NOTE CONF
I want that okay.
Ordered list of the values in the set.
NOTE CONF
Then equality testing is easy okay.
Because if I arrange it that these always delivered an
NOTE CONF
ordered list of values, then checking equality is just comparing
these lists for equality okay.
NOTE CONF
Which is which is linear okay.
We just run down the lists and compare them elements
NOTE CONF
at a time okay.
So this is going to be the the way that
NOTE CONF
I'm going to do this.
Um, and I'll just show you there is some code
NOTE CONF
for this, and I'll come into this.
Uh, I'll explain this next time, okay?
NOTE CONF
Are there any I have time for, like, one question
or possibly two if they're short.
NOTE CONF
Anybody?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Register is there.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Can you please be quiet?
Is there any way of what?
NOTE CONF
I don't remember you.
Do you have to register for the competition.
NOTE CONF
Or do you have to register for the competition?
Um, no, no, no, you just have to submit and
NOTE CONF
there will be instructions about submission.
Uh, you'll get those soon, okay?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thanks, everybody.
NOTE CONF
See you on Monday.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF